Specify generic constraints added to support nullable reference types in C# 8 (#1178)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/types.md

```ANTLR
type
    : value_type
    | reference_type
    | nullable_type_parameter
    | type_parameter

>     | type_unsafe

Reviewer: Was this change from `pointer_type` to `type_unsafe` deliberate? Is there another change coming to clause 23?

Author: I think that's a merge mistake. Reverted.

```ANTLR
type

>     : value_type

Reviewer: Is this ordering change meaningful? (I'm guessing at one point it was more than this, and then we removed bits? Or is it genuinely meaningful due to precedence of some kind?)

>     : value_type
>     | reference_type

Author: It was not meaningful. Reverting:

```suggestion
    : reference_type
    | value_type
```

    ;

nullable_reference_type
    : non_nullable_reference_type nullable_type_attribute
    ;

nullable_type_attribute
    : '?'

>     ;

Reviewer 2: _Moved from <https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/1195#discussion_r1835287427>_

The term "attribute" has a different meaning in [22 Attributes](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/94c967e7c4cb49d9c4c1eec887b65793a2368c11/standard/attributes.md#22-attributes) so using it as part of *nullable_type_attribute* feels a bit unfortunate.  Not sure what would be a better term, though.  "Facet" as used in W3C XML Schema Definition Language (XSD) comes to mind but that doesn't feel right either.  Perhaps "specifier" as in *rank_specifier*?

Author: At the meeting we decided to use `nullable_type_annotation`.

Nigel will address in #1195

    ;
```

> Each type argument shall satisfy any constraints on the corresponding type parameter ([§15.2.5](classes.md#1525-type-parameter-constraints)). A type argument whose nullability doesn't match the nullability of the type parameter satisfies the constraint with the exception that a nullable value type does not satisfy the struct constraint. A warning may be issued when the nullability of a type argument does not satisfy the nullability requirements of the constraint.

Reviewer 2: Does not satisfy the **value type constraint**.  `struct` is the keyword in the constraint syntax but it's not the name of the constraint.

> Each type argument shall satisfy any constraints on the corresponding type parameter ([§15.2.5](classes.md#1525-type-parameter-constraints)). A type argument whose nullability doesn't match the nullability of the type parameter satisfies the constraint with the exception that a nullable value type does not satisfy the value type constraint. A warning may be issued when the nullability of a type argument does not satisfy the nullability requirements of the constraint.

Reviewer 3: I don’t think this needs to be phrased in terms of value type exceptions, the point being that reference type nullability is a “soft” constraint. Maybe:

```suggestion
Each type argument shall satisfy any constraints on the corresponding type parameter ([§15.2.5](classes.md#1525-type-parameter-constraints)). A reference type argument whose nullability doesn’t match the nullability of the type parameter satisfies the constraint; however a warning may be issued.
```

I see that @KalleOlaviNiemitalo has commented on the use of “shall” here, I'll defer that to @RexJaeschke.

    ;   

type_argument
    : type nullable_argument_attribute?
    ;

> nullable_argument_attribute

Author: Note for Nigel: This enables nullable annotations on a type argument. It follows the structure you suggested in types for nullable annotation on type parameters. 

It removes the `??` from the grammar, but also does repeat the same syntax as different productions. Suggestions welcome.

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner – The attribute applies to types and we don't need two rules. Use *nullable_type_attribute* here. At the first use in the Standard (probably here?) define it and just use it elsewhere (so probably remove the definition in classes.md).

    ;   

type_argument

>     : type nullable_type_attribute?

Reviewer: Just to check, is this only needed so that we can write `Foo<T?>` for a type parameter? Because `string?` and `int?` are already `type`s.

Perhaps we should make `T?` a `type` in the grammar as well, then we don't need `nullable_type_attribute` here?

Author: Correct. this is so `string?` can be used. 

I think we already do what you say:  The grammar for NRTs and Nullable Value types specifies them as a `type` followed by the `nullable_type_attribute`.

See the change at line [#79](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/1178/files#diff-d3ce84f193d1cf106f2447950cca9dc1ed178c85ad941e568d9a9d527e45e522R79)

Reviewer: But `type` already matches `string?` because `type` includes `reference_type` as an option, and that includes `nullable_reference_type` as an option.

So I think `Foo<string?>` is already covered without this change, but `Foo<T?>` wouldn't be.

(With this change, `string??` is a valid type argument, because the `type` production would permit `string?` and then there's the optional `nullable_type_argument`.)

Author: Hmm. Are you thinking that something should be added in 8.5 (type parameters) so that a *type_parameter* could be either an *identifier* or *identifier* *nullable_type_attribute*?  That would allow `T` and `T?`.  However, I think that would also allow `string??` when the type argument was `string?` and the type parameter was `T`.

We made need help from Nigel, or a statement in prose about that happens here.

Author: The grammar has been updated, so this is no longer an issue.

A type parameter is an identifier designating a value type or reference type that the parameter is bound to at run-time.

> type_parameter, nullable_type_parameter, non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter
> 

Reviewer 3: Is this a writer's note left in by accident?

```suggestion
```

Author: Yes.

```ANTLR
type_parameter
    : identifier

nullable_type_parameter
    : non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter '?'
    ;

> non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter

Reviewer 3: Our rule names are getting rather tortuous, see comments on §8.2.1 in #1124

    : type_parameter
    ;
```

The *non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter* in *nullable_type_parameter* shall be a type parameter that isn’t constrained to be a value type.

> 
> In *nullable_type_parameter*, the annotation `?` indicates the intent that nullable type corresponding to the type arguments of this type are nullable. The absence of the annotation `?` indicates the intent that type arguments of this type are non-nullable.

Reviewer 3: This seems to imply that the *type_parameter_list* of a generic declaration can contain *nullable_type_parameter* but that is not (currently?) the case. *nullable_type_parameter* is a *type* and used in such things as the declaration of variables.

Is not the intent described here conveyed by the constraints §15.2.5?

Suggestion: delete this

```suggestion
```

Author: done (in next commit)

type_parameter
    : identifier
    ;

nullable_type_parameter
    : non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter '?'
    ;

non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter
    : type_parameter

>     ;

Reviewer 3: This grammar is wrong/pointless, as @KalleOlaviNiemitalo has commented the added rules are not used anywhere.

Unfortunately I’m not sure what the intended semantics are here.

Guessing: is the addition of the nullable type attribute meant to require the type argument to be a nullable reference and/or value type, i.e. it’s an additional kind of *primary_constraint* or *secondary_constraint*?

Author: That was my mistake. I added the additional rules in the latest commit.

Note that the grammar additions for `non_nullable_reference_type` and `nullable_reference_type` are in #1089

```

> The *non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter* in *nullable_type_parameter* shall be a type parameter that isn’t constrained to be a value type.

Reviewer 2: "shall" can give the wrong idea that the compiler would report an error otherwise.  Could clarify with a note saying that the same syntax can be used with a type parameter that is constrained to be a value type, but it means Nullable\<T\> in that case.

Author: Also waiting for more eyes here. I see your point, but I don't have the right suggestion yet.

Reviewer: Calling @Nigel-Ecma as this is on the blurry line between prose and grammar. I'm only 80% convinced I understand what's going on here in the first place, so definitely don't have a suggestion to improve it.

Reviewer 3: @jskeet – Hmm, I added further comments days ago, but after my review, and they seem to have gone AWOL. Off to make coffee and then I’ll take another shot, no promises that they’ll help here of course…

Reviewer 3: OK, I suggested that this was written WRT to the wong rule, offering instead:

```suggestion
The *type_parameter* in *non_nullable_non_value_type_parameter* shall be a type parameter that isn’t constrained to be a value type.
```
However that doesn’t address, as @KalleOlaviNiemitalo points out, that a nullable type parameter can be a nullable reference or nullable value type.

Should the rules not be:

```ANTLR
type_parameter
    : identifier
    ;

nullable_type_parameter
    : type_parameter nullable_type_attribute
    ;
```

and the para then:

```suggestion
The *type_parameter* in *nullable_type_parameter* shall be a type parameter that is constrained (§15.2.5) to be a non-nullable reference or non-nullable value type.
```

Leaving the explanation of what constraints (`struct`, `class` or `notnull`) are valid to §15.2.5.

> In *nullable_type_parameter*, the annotation `?` indicates the intent that type arguments of this type are nullable. The absence of the annotation `?` indicates the intent that type arguments of this type are non-nullable.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that the intention is for the **type argument** to be nullable.

```csharp

class C {
    void M<T>()
        where T : class
    {
        T?[] a = {};
    }
    
    void N()
    {
        M<object>();
    }
}
```

In the declaration `T?[] a = {};`, `T?` is a *nullable_type_parameter*.  The corresponding type argument is `object` in `M<object>();`, but that one isn't nullable.

Reviewer 2: On second thought, I'm not sure `T?` is a *nullable_type_parameter* after all.  It matches the *nullable_type_parameter* grammar but *nullable_type_parameter* doesn't seem to be referenced by any other grammar rule, so it is not applicable in this context (nor in any other).

Author: I'm waiting for others to weigh in here as well. I see your point, but I don't have an obvious suggestion yet.

Author: This no longer applies after the edits. Resolving.
